# FORTRAN Coding Template
Mostafa M. Rezaee

## Abstract
Crafting an efficient code to solve numerical challenges involves various intricacies. Thus, substantial coding experience is essential to rectify syntax errors and achieve accurate results. This article aims to introduce a format that helps coders mitigate common errors, facilitating the acquisition of accurate and straightforward solutions.

## Introduction
The title of this article highlights coding with Fortran, but it is important to note that this approach is applicable across other programming languages as well. A seasoned coder understands that the crux of any code lies in its algorithm design, which is fundamentally language-agnostic. This approach is organized into eleven steps, each accompanied by explanatory comments marked with an exclamation sign (!). The initial comment demarcates the program into distinct segments. Throughout this article, we succinctly delineate the merits of each step. It is recommended to replicate these explanatory comments, akin to guideboards, within the program and subsequently craft the requisite code step-by-step, adhering to the guidelines provided. This methodology has undergone trials by students at various stages of their programming journey. The proven efficacy of this approach inspired us to share and disseminate it with the aim of augmenting the coding velocity and precision of fellow researchers. Enthusiasts can acquire programs scripted in this format from the author.

## Introduction of program steps

### 1. Definition of variables:
At a glance, coding in Matlab, which does not require variable definition, appears to be more straightforward. However, the key advantage of low-level languages lies in the ability to define variables and use the 'implicit none' command, effectively overriding Fortran's defaults. This not only allows for optimal definition of an array's dimensions, helping to avoid issues related to insufficient virtual memory, but also contributes to enhancing the overall speed of program execution.

```
!******************************************************************************************
! Variables Definition
!******************************************************************************************
```

### 2. Assigning an initial value of zero to the variables:
Using uninitialized variables can lead to severe issues in your program. It is crucial to initialize all variables before utilizing them, as failing to do so may result in the compiler retrieving residual data from a preceding program that occupied the same memory segment. This can lead to unpredictable behavior and hard-to-debug errors in your program.

```
!******************************************************************************************
! Giving Zero to variables
!******************************************************************************************
```

### 3. Getting input parameters from the user:
It is important for variables that are expected to change values between consecutive runs of a program, especially when the goal of the program is to assess the variations of these parameters, to be defined by the user. This ensures that the program can be thoroughly tested and evaluated under different scenarios and conditions.

```
!******************************************************************************************
! Inputs
!******************************************************************************************
```

A useful approach is to input each variable in both numerical and character formats. This allows us to use the numerical format for performing calculations while the character format is used to verify the nature of the variables. For example, `E` and `freq` are processed as real numbers, whereas `EE` and `freqf` represent the same values but in character format. This distinction is recognized and managed by the compiler.
```
Real E , freq
Character*30 EE, freqf, filename1
write(*,'(/,2x,a,\)') ' Enter the Energy value : '
read(*,*)E
write(*,'(/,2x,a,\)') ' Again : '
read(*,*)EE
write(*,'(/,2x,a,\)') ' Enter the frequency value : '
read(*,*)freq
write(*,'(/,2x,a,\)') ' Again : '
read(*,*)freqf
```

### 4. Assigning file names using input information or problem specifications:
This section highlights a crucial aspect: optimizing the use of output files. Proper utilization can, firstly, accelerate the processing speed of these files, and secondly, ensure that the output information is systematically organized. To achieve this, it is essential to construct the file names using the input information. This simple practice can lead to significant improvements in efficiency and organization of the output data.

```
!******************************************************************************************
! Determination of Filenames and Opening files
!******************************************************************************************
```

Moreover, when our results are graphically represented, it is advisable to save the file with the `plt` extension, which is associated with the `tecplot` software. This software is not only feature-rich but also offers the convenience of generating a graph with a simple click on the file icon. Additionally, the `//` operator is used for concatenating two character expressions, and the `trim()` function is employed to eliminate unused characters from a character field. For instance, this could be applied to a graph depicting temperature variations over time at a given pulse energy and frequency.

```
filenameTt = 'E'//trim(EE)//' f'//trim(freqf)//' Tt.plt'
open(1,file=filenameTt)
```

### 5. Entering constant values into the program:
It is crucial to centralize all the program's values in this section. Additionally, organizing them in a logical and legible sequence is essential to facilitate straightforward management and control.

```
!******************************************************************************************
! Constants
!******************************************************************************************
```

### 6. Determining the number of bins of each dimension of the array optimally using input values and constant values:
Minimizing the number of directories in an array does not necessarily lead to a reduction in program execution time or a decrease in memory errors. Hence, it is crucial to optimize array allocation. Generally, it is advisable to avoid using arrays for problem-solving unless absolutely necessary.

```
!******************************************************************************************
! Arrays Allocation
!******************************************************************************************
```

### 7. Assigning an initial value of zero to all arrays:
It is essential to initialize arrays just as you would with variables. A good practice is to assign a zero value to all elements of the array using the `forall` command, which ensures that each element is explicitly set to zero before any further operations are carried out on the array. This helps in preventing unexpected behaviors caused by uninitialized elements.

```
!******************************************************************************************
! Giving Zero to Arrays
!******************************************************************************************
```

### 8. Print input values and program constant values:
It is crucial for the user to verify the accuracy of all the input values before executing the main segment of the program. To facilitate easy monitoring of these values, it is recommended to display the variable names alongside their corresponding values. This will enable the user to effortlessly check and confirm the accuracy of the input before proceeding with the main operation of the program.

```
!******************************************************************************************
! Printing Constants and Inputs
!******************************************************************************************
```

### 9. The main part of the program:
In this section, we meticulously delineate the boundary conditions and articulate the problem-solving algorithm, ensuring that both are elucidated in a clear and straightforward manner.

```
!******************************************************************************************
! Main Block of the Program
!******************************************************************************************
```

### 10. Print the results:
While the results' printing is typically designated to a separate section, there are instances when it is imperative to store the data directly into files within the primary segment of the program. Strategically selecting the location for output retrieval in the program can avert the occurrence of 'insufficient virtual memory' alerts in a majority of scenarios and, occasionally, amplify the program's execution speed by a significant factor, sometimes even by an order of magnitude.

```
!******************************************************************************************
! Printing Results
!******************************************************************************************
```

### 11. Close the opened files and terminate the program:
Upon initial observation, one might think that leaving files open at the start of a program doesn't lead to any issues. However, past experiences indicate that in order to avoid complications arising from the program's interference during subsequent runs, it is advisable to close the files upon completion of the task.

```
!******************************************************************************************
! Closing Files and Ending the Program
!******************************************************************************************
```

### Conclusion
In this article, the authors, using their years of experience, have tried to provide a template for writing a program, following which, users - from professionals to beginners - will be able to write optimal codes and avoid many errors. Of course, modular programming also follows some of these goals, but we believe this format is much easier and more efficient.
